.\" Manpage for c0pl4nd.
.\" Generated to match the real CLI surface in crates/app/src/egui_main.rs
.\" (canonical binary) and crates/app/src/main.rs (legacy binary).
.TH C0PL4ND 1 "2026-06-10" "c0pl4nd 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
c0pl4nd \- fast, GPU-accelerated, local-first terminal emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B c0pl4nd
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.RB [ update ]
.RB [ \-\-screenshot
.IR PATH ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B c0pl4nd
is a cross-platform terminal emulator written in Rust, with a
GPU-accelerated (wgpu) rendering pipeline, built-in tabs and splits, and a
single readable TOML configuration file. It runs on Windows, Linux, and
macOS, requires no account, and sends no telemetry.
.PP
Run with no arguments,
.B c0pl4nd
launches the windowed terminal. The options and the
.B update
subcommand below run a one-shot action and exit without opening a window.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-V
Print the product name and version, then exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-screenshot " PATH"
Render the terminal to a PNG at
.I PATH
without opening a window (headless render, used for documentation and CI
media). If
.I PATH
is omitted, the image is written to
.IR c0pl4nd.png .
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B update
Perform an explicit, user-initiated update check against the public GitHub
Releases API for the configured release channel, then exit. The check is
offline-graceful: a failed network check prints a notice and exits
successfully rather than erroring. The release channel is read from the
persisted configuration file (default channel:
.IR stable ).
.SH LEGACY BINARY
A second binary,
.BR c0pl4nd\-legacy ,
ships side by side. It is the older winit-driven terminal and additionally
accepts:
.TP
.BR \-\-demo ", " \-\-headless
Run a headless demo: spawn the shell, run a deterministic command, and print
the rendered grid to standard output. Verifies the core engine (PTY + VT +
grid) end to end without a GPU or display.
.PP
The canonical
.B c0pl4nd
binary does not accept
.BR \-\-demo .
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B c0pl4nd
works with no configuration. To customize it, edit a single TOML file:
.TP
.B Linux/macOS
.I ~/.config/c0pl4nd/config.toml
.RI ( $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/c0pl4nd/config.toml
when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is set)
.TP
.B Windows
.I %APPDATA%\\c0pl4nd\\config.toml
.PP
Changes are applied live on save. See the
.B CONFIG.md
reference shipped with the project for the full set of keys (fonts, themes,
keybindings, scrollback, opacity, cursor styles, and the CRT/scanline
effect), and
.B docs/KEYBINDINGS.md
for the default keyboard shortcuts.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B C0PL4ND_LOG
Tracing filter for the canonical binary's diagnostic log (written to standard
error). Uses the
.B tracing
env-filter syntax (e.g.
.IR debug ,
.IR c0pl4nd_core=trace ).
The legacy binary defaults to
.I warn
when unset.
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Honoured as the default tracing filter by the canonical binary when
.B C0PL4ND_LOG
is not set.
.TP
.B C0PL4ND_REDUCED_MOTION
When set, honours the reduced-motion convention: animated chrome (such as the
drag-ghost glide) is suppressed.
.TP
.B WGPU_BACKEND
Overrides the wgpu backend selection (e.g.
.IR vulkan ,
.IR dx12 ,
.IR gl ).
On Windows, transparency requires the Vulkan backend; opaque windows default
to DX12. Set this to force a specific backend if a third-party Vulkan overlay
layer causes a crash.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/c0pl4nd/config.toml
Per-user configuration file (Unix).
.TP
.I %APPDATA%\\c0pl4nd\\config.toml
Per-user configuration file (Windows).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B c0pl4nd
exits
.B 0
on success. A failed
.B update
check is reported but still exits
.BR 0 ,
because a failed check is not a crash.
.SH SEE ALSO
The project README, CONFIG.md, docs/KEYBINDINGS.md, docs/LAYOUT.md, and
TROUBLESHOOTING.md shipped with the source distribution.
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/46b-ETYKiAL/Itasha.Corp_C0PL4ND/issues
the project issue tracker
.UE .
